

Proctor2013 - Effect of Aβ immunisation in Alzheimer's disease

Extension of a previously published stochastic computer model (designed to
examine some of the key pathways involved in the aggregation of amyloid-beta
(Aβ) and the micro-tubular binding protein tau) to include the main processes
involved in passive and active immunisation against Aβ and then demonstrate
the effects of this intervention on soluble Aβ.

This model is described in the article:

[Investigating interventions in Alzheimer's disease with computer simulation
models.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/24098635)

Proctor CJ, Boche D, Gray DA, Nicoll JA

PLoS ONE 2013; 8(9): e73631

Abstract:

Progress in the development of therapeutic interventions to treat or slow the
progression of Alzheimer's disease has been hampered by lack of efficacy and
unforeseen side effects in human clinical trials. This setback highlights the
need for new approaches for pre-clinical testing of possible interventions.
Systems modelling is becoming increasingly recognised as a valuable tool for
investigating molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in ageing and age-
related diseases. However, there is still a lack of awareness of modelling
approaches in many areas of biomedical research. We previously developed a
stochastic computer model to examine some of the key pathways involved in the
aggregation of amyloid-beta (Aβ) and the micro-tubular binding protein tau.
Here we show how we extended this model to include the main processes involved
in passive and active immunisation against Aβ and then demonstrate the effects
of this intervention on soluble Aβ, plaques, phosphorylated tau and tangles.
The model predicts that immunisation leads to clearance of plaques but only
results in small reductions in levels of soluble Aβ, phosphorylated tau and
tangles. The behaviour of this model is supported by neuropathological
observations in Alzheimer patients immunised against Aβ. Since, soluble Aβ,
phosphorylated tau and tangles more closely correlate with cognitive decline
than plaques, our model suggests that immunotherapy against Aβ may not be
effective unless it is performed very early in the disease process or combined
with other therapies.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[BIOMD0000000488](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/BIOMD0000000488).

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024).

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

